# TrueNAS CORE Container Storage Provider

The TrueNAS CORE Container Storage Provider (CSP) is an API gateway to provide iSCSI block storage provisioning using the [HPE CSI Driver for Kubernetes](https://github.com/hpe-storage/csi-driver). It allows you to use [TrueNAS CORE](https://www.truenas.com) to provide persistent storage using iSCSI to Kubernetes.

CSP API endpoints:

- tokens
- hosts
- volumes
- snapshots
- volume_groups (not implemented)
- snapshot_groups (not implemented)

The [CSP specification](https://github.com/hpe-storage/container-storage-provider) in an open specification that supports iSCSI and Fibre Channel protocols.

As of version 1.4.0 of the HPE CSI Driver, these parts of the CSI spec are currently implemented:

- Dynamic Provisioning
- Raw Block Volume
- Volume Expansion
- Data Sources (`PersistentVolumeClaims` and `VolumeSnapshots`)
- Volume Limits
- Ephemeral Local Volumes (not supported by the TrueNAS CORE CSP, see [limitations](#limitations))

Volume stats and topology are the two CSI features currently not supported by the HPE CSI Driver.

# Releases

Releases will track the upstream versioning of the HPE CSI Driver for Kubernetes and potential bugfixes in the TrueNAS CORE CSP will be pushed to the same image tag matching the HPE CSI Driver version.

* [TrueNAS CORE CSP v1.4.0](https://github.com/hpe-storage/truenas-csp/releases/tag/v1.4.0) for HPE CSI Driver v1.4.0
* [TrueNAS CORE CSP v1.3.0](https://github.com/hpe-storage/truenas-csp/releases/tag/v1.3.0) for HPE CSI Driver v1.3.0

# Install

See [INSTALL](INSTALL.md).

# Building & testing

A Makefile is provided to run the CSP in a local docker container, make sure docker is running and issue:

```
make all run
```

The CSP is now listening on localhost:8080

**Important:** When building and testing the CSP locally it will run with debug logging switched on and it will log your API key on stdout in the container.

There are a few adhoc tests provided. Make sure you have a TrueNAS CORE appliance configured with:

- A pool named "tank" 
- iSCSI portal configured as described in the [prerequisites](INSTALL.md#prerequisites).

```
make test backend=<IP address of management interface on the TrueNAS appliance> password=<API key>
```

**Note:** None of the tests are comprehensive nor provide full coverage and should be considered equivalent to "Does the light come on?".

A Kubernetes e2e test driver configuration [file is provided](test-driver.yaml). Use per [this blog post](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/01/08/testing-of-csi-drivers/#end-to-end-testing).

# Limitations

These are the known limitations.

- **Ephemeral Local Volumes:** Due to how TrueNAS CORE handles ZVol names internally and the long names generated by the HPE CSI Driver when requesting ephemeral storage, Ephemeral Local Volumes is not compatible with the TrueNAS CORE CSP. Generic Ephemeral Volumes introduced as an Alpha feature in Kubernetes 1.19 works as the volumes are derived from a regular `StorageClass`.
- **Volume sizing:** TrueNAS CORE ZVols "volblocksize" need to be even divisible by the requesting volume size. This is a non-issue if you're working with even "Gi" sizes in the `PersistentVolumeClaims`. It gets hairy if working with "Mi" sizes and large volume block sizes.

# Need help?

Please file an [issue](https://github.com/hpe-storage/truenas-csp/issues). This software is not supported by Hewlett Packard Enterprise. It's a voluntary community effort.

# Contributing

Contributing to the TrueNAS CORE CSP is subject to the following [contributing](CONTRIBUTING.md) guidelines.

# Other Container Storage Providers for HPE CSI Driver

There's currently no other open source CSPs, but the official HPE CSI Driver for Kubernetes include:

- [HPE Nimble Storage](https://scod.hpedev.io/container_storage_provider/hpe_nimble_storage/index.html)
- [HPE Primera](https://scod.hpedev.io/container_storage_provider/hpe_3par_primera/index.html) (also works for HPE 3PAR)

# Similar projects

The TrueNAS CORE CSP is not the only enabler of TrueNAS CORE for Kubernetes.

- [Democratic CSI](https://github.com/democratic-csi/democratic-csi): A generic OpenZFS CSI driver that supports multiple OpenZFS implementations
- [FreeNAS Provisioner](https://github.com/nmaupu/freenas-provisioner): An external provisioner for FreeNAS NFS exports

# License

TrueNAS CORE(R) (C) 2021 iXsystems, Inc.

TrueNAS CORE CSP is released under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

(C) Copyright 2021 Hewlett Packard Enterprise Development LP.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
